Add proposed well-lit path (#660)
llm-d-incubation/llm-d-fast-model-actuation: guides/fast-model-actuation/README.md

## Configuration

| Parameter               | Value                                                         |
| ----------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Model                   | [Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B](https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B)  |
| Requesting pod replicas | 2                                                             |
| Launcher count          | 1 (per matching node)                                         |
| GPUs per requesting pod | 1                                                             |
| Router                  | llm-d-router-standalone                                      |

## Prerequisites

This guide assumes you have a Kubernetes cluster with GPU nodes and the [llm-d router](../../guides/recipes/router/README.md) infrastructure available. If you are starting from an existing llm-d deployment, the Gateway API Inference Extension CRDs may already be installed and you can skip that step.

> - Have the [proper client tools installed on your local system](../../helpers/client-setup/README.md) to use this guide.

Author: Revised to use absolute links to latest version.

kubectl scale deployment fma-requester -n ${NAMESPACE} --replicas=0

kubectl scale deployment fma-requester -n ${NAMESPACE} --replicas=2

kubectl wait --for=condition=ready pod -l app=fma-requester -n ${NAMESPACE} --timeout=120s
```
<!-- guide:verify.tests.sleep_wake end -->

Re-run the inference request from step 2 to confirm the model is serving again.

> [!NOTE]
> Wake latency depends on the Kubernetes scheduler assigning the new requesting pod to the same node and GPU where the sleeping vLLM instance resides. If a different GPU is assigned, a new vLLM instance starts from scratch (cold start). Sleep/wake is most valuable in multi-GPU-per-node configurations where multiple models share the same GPU pool and can be swapped in and out without cold-starting.

## Benchmarking

This guide uses [`llmdbenchmark`](https://github.com/llm-d/llm-d-benchmark) — the supported standard CLI for llm-d performance benchmarking. It defaults to the `nop` harness (which stands the stack up and validates it end-to-end without driving a synthetic load); the richer, FMA-specific experimentation workflow lives in [`llm-d-benchmark`](https://github.com/llm-d/llm-d-benchmark) itself.

> [!IMPORTANT]

> > The Benchmarking section below contains only the **fast-model-actuation-specific commands** needed to drive the stack you just deployed — for everything else (and especially when something goes wrong), start at [`helpers/benchmark.md`](../../helpers/benchmark.md).

Author: Revised to use absolute links to latest version.

# Fast Model Actuation

## Overview

> Fast Model Actuation (FMA) addresses vllm startup time using two technologies. One is vLLM sleep and wake, which can entirely avoid model loading and CUDA graph compilation in lucky scenarios. The other is running multiple vllm processes as children of a launcher process that has already done the Python module loading. FMA can manage multiple vllm instances bound to one GPU, with one instance awake at a time, to accomplish fast switching of which model that GPU is used for; this generalizes to multiple GPUs of one node.

Reviewer: I think using the word `lucky` chips away at the credibility, especially since we're describing how FMA addresses startup time.

```suggestion
Fast Model Actuation (FMA) addresses vllm startup time using two technologies. One is vLLM sleep and wake, which can entirely avoid model loading and CUDA graph compilation. The other is running multiple vLLM processes as children of a launcher process that has already done the Python module loading. FMA can manage multiple vLLM instances bound to one GPU, with one instance awake at a time, to accomplish fast switching of which model that GPU is used for; this generalizes to multiple GPUs of one node.
```

Author: Revised.

> In Kubernetes, a Pod that requests and is allocated some GPUs keeps that exclusive allocation for the Pod's lifetime. FMA uses the following **dual pod** technique to circumvent this constraint:

Reviewer: I think allocation implies there was a request, especially since the breakdown below also states it in the name of the pods.

```suggestion
In Kubernetes, a Pod is allocated GPUs keeps that exclusive allocation for the Pod's lifetime. FMA uses the following **dual pod** technique to circumvent this constraint:
```

Author: Revised.

- **Server-requesting Pods** reserve GPU resources via the Kubernetes scheduler but do not run inference themselves.

> - **Launcher Pods** (server-providing) run vLLM without requesting GPUs. They (a) gain access to all GPUs of their Node via special provisions that do not count this access as usage and (b) using `CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES` as directed by the FMA controller get vllm to use the specific GPU(s) reserved for the requesting pod.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Server-requesting Pods (aka Launcher Pods)** run vLLM instances without requesting GPUs. They (a) gain access to all GPUs of their Node via special provisions that do not count this access as usage and (b) using `CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES` as directed by the FMA controller get vLLM to use the specific GPU(s) reserved for the requesting pod.
```

Author: (A) The launcher Pods are server-providing Pods, _not_ server-requesting Pods.

(B) I tended to specifically use all-lowercase "vllm" when I wanted to put the focus on the binary or the process, because the binary is named all-lowercase "vllm".

Reviewer: Re:
(A), I meant to reflect the old one (i.e., Server-providing Pods)

(B), Sounds good.

> - **FMA Controllers** manage the lifecycle: binding requesting pods to launchers, starting vLLM instances, and orchestrating sleep/wake.

Reviewer: I think qualifying this as `FMA Controllers` is both expansive and restrictive. In the former case, I expected the description to capture the functionality of the `LauncherPopulationPolicy` controller. In the latter case, the description seems to primarily focus on the Dual-Pods Controller. If we intend to restrict it to the latter, then I'd like to suggest renaming to `Dual-Pods Controller`, but I suspect that we actually want the more expansive path.

This comment applies to all variations of `FMA controller(s)` below.

Author: Yes, I intended "FMA controllers" in the expansive sense. I have made some revisions to be consistent about that.

> Server-requesting pods are managed through standard Kubernetes controllers such as Deployments and autoscalers. The FMA controller watches these pods and translates scheduler decisions into actions on launcher pods and GPUs.

Reviewer: `these` could be mistaken for deployments and autoscalers.

```suggestion
Server-requesting pods are managed through standard Kubernetes controllers such as Deployments and autoscalers. The FMA controller watches requesting pods and translates scheduler decisions into actions on launcher pods and GPUs.
```

Author: reworded

> When a requesting pod is deleted, the controller puts the corresponding vLLM instance to sleep (model stays in GPU memory). Although the Kubernetes GPU allocation is released when the requesting pod exits, the launcher pod retains the CUDA context and keeps the model in GPU memory. The GPU remains dedicated to that launcher until it is explicitly unbound or the launcher pod is deleted. When a new requesting pod arrives and gets assigned to the same GPU, the controller wakes the sleeping instance, resuming in seconds instead of cold-starting from scratch.

Reviewer: >When a requesting pod is deleted, the controller puts the corresponding vLLM instance to sleep (model stays in GPU memory)

This is also applicable when the deployment is scaled down to zero (like we do for our benchmarking), right?

Reviewer: This is confirmed further [below](https://github.com/llm-d-incubation/llm-d-fast-model-actuation/pull/660/changes#diff-1418499fa9a557aa5fc5edb141fa01d2d3a65e991926576a57d6daf58594422eR222). 

Perhaps we should say
> When a requester pod deployment is deleted or scaled down to zero, ...`

Author: > When a requesting pod is deleted, the controller puts the corresponding vLLM instance to sleep (model stays in GPU memory).

That was a typo! Or a misunderstanding. You are critiquing words copied from https://github.com/llm-d/llm-d/pull/1779, written by @diegocastanibm (and here _is_ the right place to critique them). In fact, a sleeping vllm instance keeps the model in **CPU** memory.

It does not matter what commanded deletion of the sever-requesting Pod. It does not matter whether this deletion reduced a set size to zero or not.

Author: I have revised the text in this neighborhood.

Reviewer: Thanks for the clarification. Indeed, I made the comments keeping in mind that @diegocastanibm wrote the original prose, and I do appreciate you taking care of them on his behalf.

> FMA also supports instant model switching: if a new requesting pod references a different `InferenceServerConfig`, the FMA controller can direct the bound launcher to swap the loaded model in place, avoiding a full cold start.

Reviewer: Full may imply there is partial (which does happen). Up to this point, the different actuation paths have not been covered, so I think removing the word full removes any confusion.

```suggestion
FMA also supports instant model switching: if a new requesting pod references a different `InferenceServerConfig`, the FMA controller can direct the bound launcher to swap the loaded model in place, avoiding a cold start.
```

Author: I do not like these words, they seem to imply some "swapping" functionality that is not there. All we have is sleep/wake, and vllm instance create/delete.

Author: Significantly revised to be much more clear.

> [!NOTE]
> Fast wake only occurs if the Kubernetes scheduler assigns the new requesting pod to the same node (and GPU) where the sleeping vLLM instance resides. In a cluster with a single GPU per node, if the scheduler picks the same node, the GPU is necessarily the same one. In a multi-node pool the scheduler may assign the pod to a different node.

## Configuration

| Parameter               | Value                                                         |
| ----------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | Model                   | [Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B](https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B)  |

Reviewer: I think the 8B model is a better model that balances showing off the sub-second hot-start of FMA without needing a big GPU to fit the model. This would apply all instances below of `Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B` -> `Qwen/Qwen3-8B`

```suggestion
| Model                   | [Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B](https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen3-8B)  |
```

- Have the [proper client tools installed on your local system](https://github.com/llm-d/llm-d/blob/main/helpers/client-setup/README.md) to use this guide.

- Checkout llm-d repo:

<!-- guide:prerequisites.clone start -->
<!-- llm-d-cicd:skip start -->
```bash
git clone https://github.com/llm-d/llm-d.git && cd llm-d && git checkout ${BRANCH}
```
<!-- llm-d-cicd:skip end -->
<!-- guide:prerequisites.clone end -->

- Set the guide specific environment variables:

<!-- guide:env.static start -->
```bash
export BRANCH=testy
export REPO_ROOT=$(realpath $(git rev-parse --show-toplevel))
export GUIDE_NAME=fast-model-actuation
export NAMESPACE=llm-d-fast-model-actuation
export FMA_VERSION=0.6.2
export FMA_CHART_INSTANCE_NAME=fma
export MODEL=Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B
export CURL_TEST_IMAGE=cfmanteiga/alpine-bash-curl-jq:latest
export BENCHMARK_REF=main
export HARNESS=nop
export WORKLOAD=nop.yaml
export GATEWAY_CLASS=epponly # options: epponly, gke, agentgateway, istio
```
<!-- guide:env.static end -->

> - Source the common guide environment variables (`GAIE_VERSION`, `ROUTER_CHART_VERSION`, `ROUTER_STANDALONE_CHART`, …):

Reviewer: Playing a naive reader here, and I don't know what I would source these with. In fact, even as an FMA helper, I don't know what I would put for those 😅

  deployment "${FMA_CHART_INSTANCE_NAME}-launcher-populator" -n ${NAMESPACE}
```
<!-- guide:deploy.fma_controllers end -->

### 4. Deploy the llm-d Router

<!-- guide:deploy.standalone start -->
```bash
helm install ${GUIDE_NAME} \
  ${ROUTER_STANDALONE_CHART} \
  -f ${REPO_ROOT}/guides/recipes/router/base.values.yaml \
  -f ${REPO_ROOT}/guides/${GUIDE_NAME}/router/${GUIDE_NAME}.values.yaml \
  -n ${NAMESPACE} --version ${ROUTER_CHART_VERSION}
```
<!-- guide:deploy.standalone end -->

### 5. Create FMA Resources

Apply the `InferenceServerConfig`, `LauncherConfig`, and `LauncherPopulationPolicy` that define the model to serve, the launcher pod template, and how many launchers to place:

<!-- guide:deploy.fma_resources start -->
```bash
kubectl apply -n ${NAMESPACE} -k ${REPO_ROOT}/guides/${GUIDE_NAME}/modelserver/
```
<!-- guide:deploy.fma_resources end -->

> [!NOTE]
> This guide uses [Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B](https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B) which is publicly accessible and does not require a HuggingFace token. For gated models, you would need to mount the token via a different mechanism (FMA's ISC does not support `secretKeyRef`).

> [!NOTE]

> > `HF_HOME` points at `/tmp/hf_cache`, which is ephemeral node storage. This keeps the guide self-contained, but every fresh launcher re-downloads the model weights and re-runs `torch.compile`. For production — or any repeated benchmarking — back `HF_HOME` with a shared, persistent volume (a PVC, e.g. `ReadWriteMany`) so model weights and compiled graphs persist across launcher pods and are not recomputed on each start.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> `HF_HOME` points at `/tmp/hf_cache`, which is ephemeral node storage. This keeps the guide self-contained, but every fresh launcher re-downloads the model weights and re-runs `torch.compile`. For production — or any repeated benchmarking — back `HF_HOME` with a shared, persistent volume (e.g., a PVC with `ReadWriteMany`) so model weights and compiled graphs persist across launcher pods and are not recomputed on each start.
```

> [!NOTE]

> > The launcher pod does **not** request GPU resources from the Kubernetes scheduler or device plugin. Instead, the FMA controller sets `CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES` to point to the GPU reserved by the corresponding requesting pod, giving the launcher direct access to that GPU via the CUDA runtime. The `runtimeClassName: nvidia` is required on platforms (e.g., OpenShift) where GPU driver libraries are injected via the runtime class rather than the device plugin resource request.

Reviewer: IIRC from the troubleshooting discussion threads, this was not broadly applicable to all versions of OpenShift, right?

> [!NOTE]
> `launcherCount` is **per matching node**. Setting `launcherCount: 1` creates one launcher pod on each node that has `nvidia.com/gpu.present: "true"`. Only launchers that get bound to a requesting pod will actually start a vLLM instance.

### 6. Create Requesting Pods

> Create the server-requesting pods that reserve GPUs and trigger model loading. A `Deployment` is used here (rather than a bare `ReplicaSet`) so the requesting pods integrate cleanly with autoscalers such as the Workload Variant Autoscaler (WVA):

Reviewer: First mention of WVA in this README, worth a pointer to what it is compared to "standard" autoscalers like HPA

```suggestion
Create the server-requesting pods that reserve GPUs and trigger model loading. A `Deployment` is used here (rather than a bare `ReplicaSet`) so the requesting pods integrate cleanly with autoscalers such as HPA or the [Workload Variant Autoscaler (WVA)](https://github.com/llm-d/llm-d-workload-variant-autoscaler):
```

<!-- guide:deploy.requester start -->
```bash
kubectl apply -n ${NAMESPACE} -k ${REPO_ROOT}/guides/${GUIDE_NAME}/requester/

kubectl wait --for=condition=ready pod -l app=fma-requester -n ${NAMESPACE} --timeout=300s
```
<!-- guide:deploy.requester end -->

You should see:

> - 2 requesting pods (`fma-requester-*`) in `Ready` state

Reviewer: I was taught later in my English learning journey (circa PhD student) that numbers less than 10 are always spelled out.

```suggestion
- Two requesting pods (`fma-requester-*`) in `Ready` state
```

> - Launcher pods in `Running` state (one per GPU node in your cluster)

Reviewer: Heterogeneous clusters are unlikely at this phase of FMA, but worth making it clear to readers that we are targeting NVIDIA GPUs.

```suggestion
- Launcher pods in `Running` state (one for each node with NVIDIA GPUs in your cluster)
```

Author: We have heterogeneous clusters today. Clusters with different models of nvidia GPUs.

Reviewer: By heterogeneous, I meant by NVIDIA, AMD, Intel, etc. This matters because there were a couple of presentations at the llm-d NYC meetup in April on porting llm-d/vLLM to AMD GPUs. I'm thinking of those folks looking at our well-lit guide.
